FORCE-FREE MOLECULAR DYNAMICS THROUGH
AUTOREGRESSIVE EQUIVARIANT NETWORKS
Fabian L. Thiemann∗
IBM Research Europe
Daresbury, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
fabian.thiemann@ibm.com
Thiago Reschützegger
IBM Research
Rio de Janeiro, 20031-170, RJ, Brazil
Massimiliano Esposito
IBM Research Europe
Daresbury, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
Tseden Taddese
The Hartree Centre
Science and Technology Facilities Council
Daresbury, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
Juan D. Olarte-Plata
The Hartree Centre
Science and Technology Facilities Council
Daresbury, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
Fausto Martelli
IBM Research Europe
Daresbury, WA4 4AD, United Kingdom
April 1, 2025
ABSTRACT
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations play a crucial role in scientific research. Yet their computa-
tional cost often limits the timescales and system sizes that can be explored. Most data-driven efforts
have been focused on reducing the computational cost of accurate interatomic forces required for
solving the equations of motion. Despite their success, however, these machine learning interatomic
potentials (MLIPs) are still bound to small time-steps. In this work, we introduce TrajCast, a trans-
ferable and data-efficient framework based on autoregressive equivariant message passing networks
that directly updates atomic positions and velocities lifting the constraints imposed by traditional
numerical integration. We benchmark our framework across various systems, including a small
molecule, crystalline material, and bulk liquid, demonstrating excellent agreement with reference MD
simulations for structural, dynamical, and energetic properties. Depending on the system, TrajCast
allows for forecast intervals up to 30× larger than traditional MD time-steps, generating over 15
ns of trajectory data per day for a solid with more than 4,000 atoms. By enabling efficient large-
scale simulations over extended timescales, TrajCast can accelerate materials discovery and explore
physical phenomena beyond the reach of traditional simulations and experiments. An open-source
implementation of TrajCast is accessible under https://github.com/IBM/trajcast.
Keywords Molecular dynamics · Machine learning · Equivariance
Introduction
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations are an essential tool in modern science, providing mechanistic insight into
complex phenomena, such as protein folding [ 1, 2 ], the effects of pressure on materials [3– 6 ], the existence of
liquid-liquid transitions in supercooled liquids [7– 9], and amorphization [ 10 –12 ], to name but a few, that are difficult or
impossible to study through experiments alone. By numerically integrating the equations of motion for all particles in
∗To whom the correspondance should be addressed.
arXiv:2503.23794v1 [physics.comp-ph] 31 Mar 2025
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
the molecule or material of interest, these simulations generate a trajectory, T := {x(t)}t=tmax
t=t0 , where each state x(t) is
defined by the positions, r(t) ∈ R3N , and velocities, v(t) ∈ R3N , of the N atoms at given time t. However, obtaining
trajectories at first principles accuracy is computationally intensive, typically limiting them to systems of a few hundred
atoms and timescales up to one nanosecond. These computational costs arise from (1) accurately approximating
the Schrödinger equation to obtain reliable forces, and (2) the necessity for millions of integration steps due to the
typically small time-step of 0.5 – 1.0 femtoseconds (fs). Accordingly, two strategies have emerged to speed up tra-
jectory generation, focusing on either improving force prediction efficiency or evolving the system with larger time-steps.
Machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) fall into the first group and can accelerate the calculation of ab
initio-quality forces by orders of magnitude. Trained on small systems where electronic structure calculations are
feasible, these models operate locally, allowing for an accurate representation of the potential energy surface in broader,
chemically similar systems without requiring direct reference data. This has not only enabled access to much larger
time and length scales, as demonstrated by the remarkable nanosecond-long simulation of the HIV virus with 44 million
atoms [13], but has also catalyzed exciting discoveries in simulations, including a new superionic phase of water under
confinement [ 14] and structural and electronic phase transitions in silicon [15 ]. The pursuit for faster and more accurate
architectures has evolved from kernel-based methods to equivariant graph neural networks (GNNs) [16 –27 ], maturing
into its own field [ 28 – 31]. This rapid progression has culminated recently in the introduction of several foundation
models [32–36] trained on large parts of the periodic table, which can be fine-tuned to the system of interest.
Multiple-time-step (MTS) integrators [37 , 38 ], conversely, follow the second strategy aiming to loosen the constraint
of small integration steps. Specifically, they assign shorter time-steps to rapidly changing interactions, like atomic
bonds, and longer time-steps to slower intermolecular interactions. In practice, MTS integrators are primarily used with
classical potentials, which provide inherent scale separation through their analytical yet less accurate and transferable
form. A recent study [ 39 ], however, successfully coupled MTS with MLIPs by co-training a smaller model for
short-time interactions, evaluated at each timestep during MD, alongside a larger, more expressive model which is
called less frequently. While this led to a 3× speed-up, MTS integrators are fundamentally limited by the need for small
time-steps in parts of the system, and further validation of scale-separated MLIPs for more complex systems is needed.
Generative machine learning approaches go beyond the idea of MTS, seeking to efficiently generate representative
configurations or even complete trajectories without computing or integrating interatomic forces. Boltzmann
generators [40 ] directly approximate the Boltzmann distribution, producing states consistent with the equilibrium
distribution at temperature T . However, these samples lack temporal order, obstructing insights into the system’s
temporal evolution and dynamical properties. Recurrent neural networks have been shown to accurately interpolate MD
trajectories of small molecules [41 ] and reliably predict the dynamics of 16 Lennard-Jones particles with time-steps
over 1000× larger than in traditional MD simulations [42]. These methods, however, operate with a fixed particle
number, requiring retraining for unseen or larger systems, which restricts their applicability to realistic large-scale
problems where accurate ab initio reference data is often hard or impossible to obtain.
The flow-based Timewarp [43 ] model, conversely, generates MD trajectories via autoregressive roll-out with time-steps
up to the order of 105 fs and has been shown to generalize to unseen peptides. Notwithstanding the speed-up of
Timewarp and its recent generative competitors, ITO[ 44 ] and MDGen[45 ], these approaches propagate atomic positions
only, leaving the system’s state incomplete without momenta. Beyond impeding the computation of transport properties,
this lack of full phase-space coverage introduces ambiguity; the same atomic configuration can correspond to different
velocity distributions and, thus, trajectories at different temperatures. This limits the ability of these methods to
interpolate and extrapolate across thermodynamic variables. Other deep learning architectures, such as the equivariant
graph neural operator [ 46] or the work presented by Fu et al. [47 ], incorporate assumptions about chemical bonds or
restrict their focus to heavy atom motion. While these inductive biases may improve performance on specific tasks,
they hinder generalizability to reactive systems where bond breaking and formation occurs. Beyond architectural
details, many of these methods require hundreds of nanoseconds of trajectory data to predict small molecule behavior
accurately, making them less practical for scaling to complex systems. Furthermore, nearly all generative models have
been evaluated exclusively on small molecules and peptides, leaving their applicability to materials, condensed matter
phases, and the accurate reproduction of equilibrium structural and dynamical properties largely unexplored.
In this work, we introduce TrajCast, a framework that employs equivariant message passing neural networks (MPNNs)
to autoregressively predict the next state of a molecular system. Unlike most MLIPs that derive forces from predicted
energies, TrajCast directly outputs the next state (positions and velocities) over a period ∆t which is at least one
2
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
magnitude larger than the typical timestep in equivalent MD simulations. By preserving the sequential nature of
the trajectory, TrajCast recovers the system’s dynamics and enables the computation of time-dependent properties.
Generating full-state trajectories during roll-out ensures a complete system representation, enabling interpolation and
extrapolation across different temperature regimes. TrajCast is free of assumptions about chemical bonds, making it
capable, in principle, of modeling reactive systems. Relying on local environments, TrajCast is highly scalable and
transferable, enabling models trained on small systems to be applied to larger or chemically similar ones. Moreover,
TrajCast is very data-efficient, requiring significantly less than 1 ns of trajectory training data to achieve accurate
predictions. To our knowledge, TrajCast is the only generative framework that integrates all these capabilities. We
demonstrate its accuracy across a range of systems, from small molecules to crystalline solids and bulk liquids,
highlighting its ability to consistently reproduce structural, energetic, and dynamic properties, and showcasing its
robustness and versatility across different domains. Dependent on the system, TrajCast uses time intervals between 10×
and 30× larger than traditional MD time-steps. By avoiding gradient computations, this enables trajectory generation of
more than 15 ns and 1 ns per day for crystalline quartz and liquid water, comprising 4,300 and 5,100 atoms, respectively.
Results
TrajCast Framework
We start by outlining the TrajCast architecture to predict temporal evolution of an atomistic system, as depicted in
Fig. 1. TrajCast produces trajectories autoregressively, where the state x(t + ∆t) is generated from x(t) and used to
predict the next state at the following time interval ∆t (Fig. 1A), thus preserving the Markovian nature of traditional
MD. To enable comparison with experiments at constant temperature, we aim to sample trajectories from the canonical
ensemble at constant temperature T . We achieve this using a strategy inspired by the CSVR thermostat [48 ], where
each time step is followed by a rescaling of the atomic velocities to enforce canonical sampling. Rather than relying
on forces to propagate the system using numerical integration in the microcanonical (NVE) ensemble with a small
timestep δt, however, an equivariant MPNN predicts the updated positions and velocities at a larger timestep ∆t ≫ δt,
as shown in the grey box in Fig. 1A. Additional model details are provided in the methods section, and here we focus
on the key elements and deviations from previous work.
Compared to MLIPs, our equivariant MPNN takes the atomic velocities v(t) in addition to the positions r(t) and
atomic types Z as input. In an embedding layer (Fig. 1B) both node and edge attributes are encoded to produce the
initial node features h0
i and express the edge and velocity vectors in a radial and spherical harmonics basis. For the
chemical element Zi and the magnitude of the edge vectors rij , we follow the same approach as the MLIPs NequiP [ 22 ]
and MACE [ 24], using a one-hot encoding and learnable Bessel functions multiplied with a polynomial cutoff as
introduced originally in DimeNet [49], respectively. Since the atomic velocity depends on the particle mass, we encode
its magnitude vi using a Gaussian basis set, where each Gaussian is weighted according to the chemical element of
node i. Thus, the μth element of the encoding is given by:
Rμ(vi) =
MX
m=1
WZi,mϕm(vi) (1)
where ϕm is the mth Gaussian and WZi,m is a learnable weight dependent on atomic species Zi.
The latent features are updated through a series of convolutions in the message passing layer highlighted by the white
box in Fig. 1A. The message from node j to node i in layer k, schematically shown in Fig. 1E, is constructed similarly
to that in NequIP [22], and given by
mk
ij = hk
j ⊗MLPk
e (R(rij ))
CG Y(ˆrij ) . (2)
Here, ⊗MLPk
e (R(rij ))
CG represents the Clebsch-Gordan (CG) tensor product, which generates all equivariant combinations
of irreducible representations (irreps) of node features and the spherical harmonic embedding of the edge vector
projected on the unit sphere, ˆrij . The individual terms are then weighted by a multilayer perceptron (MLP), which take
the radial basis embeddings of the edge vector magnitudes rij as input. For details on the derivation, the reader is
referred to textbooks on representation theory overview and references [ 50 ], [51 ], or [ 23 ] for applications to GNNs and
atomistic modeling.
The constructed pairwise messages, mij , only contain information about the topology of the neighborhood N (i). To
incorporate velocities in the feature update (Fig. 1D), we follow an approach introduced by Brandstetter et al. [51 ].
3
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure 1: Overview of the TrajCast architecture. (A) Autoregressive workflow: An atomistic system at time t0 is
passed through an equivariant MPNN (grey box) to predict the new positions and velocities at time t1. Atomic attributes
(positions, velocities, chemical elements) are encoded into initial features, which are refined over T message passing
blocks. Estimates of the displacement and velocity vectors are generated based on the final features. These are then
refined to ensure momentum conservation. The trajectory is built by rolling out predictions, where outputs from one step
serve as inputs for the next. A thermostat ensures sampling from the canonical (NVT) ensemble at constant temperature
T , with states following the Boltzmann distribution. (B) The embedding block encodes node and edge attributes and
generates the initial features. (C) Messages are constructed by convolving latent features with filters derived from
a learnable radial basis and the spherical harmonics expansion of edge vectors. (D) In the update block, messages
from neighbors are pooled and combined via a tensor product with velocity vectors in a learnable radial and spherical
harmonic basis. The result is passed through a non-linearity and added to the previous layer’s features, weighted by
the node’s chemical element. (E) Conservation of total linear and angular momentum is enforced by adjusting the
displacements and velocities.
After an average pooling of the pairwise messages mij , we compute a node-based CG tensor-product between the
aggregated message, mi, and the spherical harmonic embedding of the velocity vector projected on the unit sphere, ˆvi,
resulting in
˜mk
i = mk
i ⊗MLPk
v (R(vi,Zi))
CG Y(ˆvi) . (3)
Similar to the first tensor product, the respective paths are weighted based on the species dependent embedding of
the velocity magnitudes, R(vi, Zi), passed through a MLP. We constrain the dimensionality of ˜mk
i by applying a
linear self-interaction after the average pooling step. The new node features hk+1
i are then computed in a ResNet-like
approach: The conditioned message ˜mk
i is passed through a non-linear gate [52] and added to the transformed node
features from the previous layer, which are processed using an element-dependent linear self-interaction layer, as
proposed in MACE [24, 53].
After K message passing layers, the vector components (l = 1, p = −1) of the final latent features hK
i are passed
through two linear layers to produce the initial estimate of the displacement vector ∆r′
i and the new velocity v′
i.
Predicting relative displacements instead of absolute positions makes the model predictions independent of the
dimensions of the simulation box. Since both total linear and angular momentum are conserved in the NVE ensemble,
the displacements and velocities are refined by removing any center of mass motion, ∆DCOM, and excess momenta,
∆P and ∆L, generated during the process as illustrated in Fig. 1D. The new positions are then calculated by adding
the displacements to the current atomic positions, while the refined velocities are rescaled by a CSVR thermostat [48 ]
transitioning the system from the NVE ensemble to the NVT ensemble with positions r∆t and velocities v∆t that follow
the Boltzmann distribution. These outputs are used as inputs for the next step, gradually building the system’s trajectory.
While TrajCast can, in principle, operate without a thermostat to forecast a trajectory in the NVE ensemble, long
autoregressive roll-outs tend to accumulate errors, leading to instability. Beyond maintaining a constant temperature,
in the course of this work, we found that the noise injected by the CSVR thermostat helps to stabilize the model’s
predictions, as previously observed in the context of turbulence modeling [54].
4
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
We train our equivariant MPNN on configurations generated during MD runs within the NVE ensemble using common
time-steps of 0.5–1.0 fs. Relative displacements and new velocities are then computed over larger time intervals ∆t.
During training, the model weights are adjusted to minimize the residual between the true and predicted displacement
and velocity vectors. Since the current version of TrajCast infers the prediction horizon directly from the data, the
training set needs to be precomputed at a fixed ∆t. Similar to traditional MD simulations, the choice of ∆t involves
a trade-off: Smaller values inherently result in higher accuracy, as the system becomes increasingly decorrelated
over time, but are less efficient, requiring more forward passes to produce the desired trajectory. By predicting
atomic displacements and velocities based on the local environment encoded in latent features, our approach ensures
transferability across different chemical spaces and scalability to much larger systems than those encountered during
training. Unlike MLIP-driven MD, TrajCast operates in force-free manner and does not rely on computing gradients
with respect to the positions to propagate the system in time. Our framework buildson the e3nn [55 ] and cuEquivariance
Python libraries, which ensure the efficient equivariant transformation and propagation of geometric objects within
deep learning frameworks.
Experiments
We validate the accuracy of TrajCast across various systems. In addition to the small molecule paracetamol, we
demonstrate its performance on crystalline α-quartz and liquid water. For each system, we train several models across
different prediction horizons ∆t. We report the mean absolute errors (MAE) for displacements and velocities for all
MPNNs on a hold-out test set in section A.1 of the SI, showing that MAEs increase with larger ∆t. Besides deviating
from the true NVE trajectory, large MAEs can cause instabilities, leading to unphysical behavior. Here, we showcase
results for the largest ∆t that accurately reproduces the chosen properties and produces a stable trajectory. Since
our methodology samples from the canonical ensemble, direct comparison with MD is infeasible, as trajectories will
inevitably depart due to the thermostat-induced randomness. Instead, we assess whether ensemble averages of dynamic,
structural, and energetic properties are accurately reproduced. We demonstrate in section B.2 of the SI, however,
that TrajCast can reproduce a NVE trajectory accurately when run without a thermostat. Finally, we conclude our
experiments, by comparing the data efficiency of TrajCast across systems and prediction intervals ∆t.
Small Molecules: Paracetamol
We start by benchmarking the proposed methodology based on paracetamol, a small molecule included in the
(rev)MD17 datasets [56, 57 ] commonly used for validating MLIPs. Paracetamol is chosen for its size and the presence
of four distinct chemical elements (H, C, N, and O). Rather than using the original datasets, we perform classical MD
simulations and produce a set of 10,000 training configurations sampled from NVE trajectories equilibrated at 300 K.
The prediction horizon is set to ∆t = 7 fs, 14 times larger than the timestep used in the MD reference. With the MPNN
coupled to the CSVR thermostat, we generate a stable 7 ns trajectory (106 steps) to compute ensemble averages and
properties for comparison against MD NVT trajectories. For a fair comparison, all properties from the MD reference
were computed using the same frame frequency as the prediction horizon in TrajCast. Specifically, we validate our
approach by assessing its accuracy in reproducing the molecule’s dynamics, energetics, and kinetics, as shown in Fig. 2.
For the dynamics, we analyse the species-resolved vibrational density of states (VDOS), which provides a comprehen-
sive description of intramolecular and, if applicable, intermolecular motion. Panel A of Fig. 2 displays the VDOS
for all chemical species, computed from both MD and TrajCast trajectories. With the chosen prediction horizon, the
highest resolvable frequency is ≈ 2400 cm−1, which prevents detecting intramolecular vibrations of bonds like C–H
and O–H, with characteristic frequencies around or above 3000 cm−1. Within the resolvable range, our model shows
excellent agreement with the MD reference, achieving overlap scores of ≈ 0.95, following the method in reference [ 58].
While larger time-steps in MD cause shifts in the VDOS peaks due to integration errors and aliasing, this artifact is
absent in TrajCast, where peaks align with those from the small MD time-step.
Next, we report the potential energy distribution in Fig. 2B, computed from all configurations in both TrajCast and
MD trajectories using the same force field. We find that the distributions match very closely, indicating that TrajCast
indeed samples from the Boltzmann distribution and produces a trajectory within the NVT ensemble. This also provides
evidence that structural features, such as bonds, angles, and dihedrals, are well recovered. Building on this, we explore
how well TrajCast resolves the system’s kinetics based on free energy barriers in panel C of Fig. 2. Specifically, we
compute the free energy surface (FES) as a function of two dihedral angles, ψ1 and ψ2, corresponding to the torsional
rotation of the hydroxyl and amine group, respectively, highlighted in the left box in center panel of Fig. 2C. The
FES from both MD and TrajCast agree very well qualitatively, as shown in the top panel of Fig. 2C. In both cases,
paracetamol preserves planarity and adopts either a cis or trans configuration, with the hydroxyl and amine groups
5
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure 2: Comparison of properties of paracetamol from MD and TrajCast with a 7 fs prediction horizon. (A)
Dynamical properties are compared based on the element-specific vibrational density of states (VDOS). (B) Energetics
are validated by comparing the distribution of the potential energy, computed in post-processing for the Trajcast-
generated trajectory by using the same force field as in the reference MD. (C) Free energy barriers drive the system’s
kinetics and are computed from the free energy surface (FES), shown for both MD and TrajCast at the top. The FES is
generated by sampling two dihedral angles, ψ1 and ψ2, visualized by the inset within the bottom panel. The center
panel visualizes different realizations of paracetamol for various dihedral pairs, matching the colors of corresponding
points in the FES. Barriers are calculated along the cuts shown on the FES and colored accordingly in the bottom panel.
pointing in the same or opposite directions, respectively. These configurations can be realized by different sets of
dihedral angles related by symmetry: cis configurations correspond to |ψ1| ≤ π/2 and |ψ2| ≤ π/2, or |ψ1| ≥ π/2 and
|ψ2| ≥ π/2; trans configurations occur when |ψ1| ≥ π/2 and |ψ2| ≤ π/2, or |ψ1| ≤ π/2 and |ψ2| ≥ π/2. Snapshots
of paracetamol corresponding to selected dihedral pairs in the FES are shown in the central panel of Fig. 2C. For a
more quantitative comparison, we compute the barriers along cuts at ψ1 = 0 and ψ2 = 0, shown in the bottom panel of
Fig. 2C. TrajCast closely matches the shape and barrier heights predicted by MD, with nearly identical free energy
profiles for hydroxyl dihedral rotation (ψ2 = 0) and deviations within ≈ kB T for varying ψ2, peaking at the local
maxima (ψ2 → ±π/2). Overal, the agreement in kinetics, energetics, structural characteristics, and dynamics provides
strong evidence that TrajCast can reliably predict accurate trajectories of isolated molecules.
Crystalline Solid: Quartz
We now move to benchmarking our framework for condensed matter phases, beginning with crystalline α-quartz
illustrated in Fig. 3A. To this end, we train our MPNN on 5,000 samples from MD simulations of systems comprising
162 atoms at 300 K. In contrast to atoms of gas-phase molecules, particles forming a periodic lattice exhibit a more
constrained and correlated motion, which allows us to set the prediction horizon to ∆t = 30 fs, a 30-fold increase over
the MD timestep, while still generating stable and accurate trajectories. Similar to the previous section, we compare
TrajCast and MD based on the VDOS and energy distribution as shown in Fig. 3B and 3C, respectively. These
properties are calculated from trajectories of 15 ns length corresponding to 500,000 iterative TrajCast predictions. We
find that TrajCast agrees very well with the MD reference for both quantities achieving VDOS overlap scores [58 ]
above 0.95 for both atom types within the resolvable frequency range and almost identical energy distribution. The
peak at zero frequency is an artifact caused by the small system size and low time-sampling resolution. We observe
6
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure 3: Evaluation of TrajCast on crystalline quartz with a 30 fs prediction horizon. (A) Illustration of an
atomic configuration of quartz used to train and validate TrajCast. (B) Dynamical properties are compared based on the
element-specific vibrational density of states (VDOS). (C) Energetics are validated by comparing the distribution of the
potential energy, computed in post-processing for the Trajcast-generated trajectory by using the same force field as in
the reference MD.
that it disappears in both MD and TrajCast when the trajectory is sampled at intervals of 10 fs or lower. The accurate
reproduction of dynamics, energetics, and structural characteristics at large time intervals suggests TrajCast as a
useful tool for studying equilibrium properties of solids. In section B.3 of the SI, we demonstrate that our approach
scales efficiently with system size, enabling the generation of nearly 20 ns per day for a 3 × 3 × 3 quartz supercell
comprising about 4,300 atoms. As a comparison, MD simulations using the widely used MLIP MACE architecture
typically produce around 1 ns of trajectory per day for 1,000 atoms [36 ]. Beyond pristine lattices, this could make
TrajCast well-suited for exploring defective materials, where studying phenomena at low defect concentrations requires
particularly large system sizes.
Liquid: Bulk Water
As a final test case, we focus on liquid bulk water, which requires an accurate description of both intramolecular and
intermolecular interactions. Specifically, we use a system of 64 water molecules at ambient pressure and 300 K, a
common setup for ab initio studies of bulk water [59] illustrated in Fig. 4A, with a training budget of 5,000 samples. We
report results for a prediction horizon of ∆t = 5 fs, as this provides the best trade-off between stability and accuracy.
While ten times larger than the typical MD timestep, it remains smaller than the prediction horizons explored for
α-quartz, reflecting the more complex motion of a molecular liquid compared to a crystalline solid. To evaluate the
accuracy of our model, we generate a 2.5 ns trajectory, corresponding to 500,000 roll-out steps, and compare it with a
MD trajectory of the same length. In addition to the VDOS, we additionally validate TrajCast based on the mean squared
displacement (MSD) and the radial distribution function (RDF). The former provides insight into the molecular mo-
bility, whereas the RDF enables comparison of the local structure across all pairwise combinations of chemical elements.
Starting with the VDOS in Fig. 4B, TrajCast nearly perfectly reproduces the spectrum for both oxygen and hydrogen
throughout the entire frequency range, achieving overlap scores [58] of ≈ 0.99. This strongly suggests that our
framework accurately captures molecular motion across different modes, from high-frequency intramolecular bending
and stretching to low-frequency intermolecular translation and libration. To complement the validation of the dynamics
from a position-based perspective, we next examine the mobility of water molecules based on the MSD for a correlation
time τ of up to 10 ps visualized in Fig. 4C. While TrajCast achieves excellent agreement with its MD reference in the
ballistic regime, τ ⪅ 0.5 ps, MSDs diverge slightly at longer timescales which is likely due to error accumulation
during the roll-out process. To quantify these deviations, we compute the diffusion coefficient from the slope of the
MSDs in the diffusive regime τ ≥ 1.0 ps obtaining 2.18 ± 0.19 and 1.84 ± 0.03 ×10−9 m2 s−1, for TrajCast and MD
respectively. Although TrajCast predicts slightly more mobile water, the diffusion coefficients are in close agreement,
indicating that our framework can reliably and consistently predict the dynamics of molecular liquids. Beyond the
7
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure 4: Benchmarking TrajCast on liquid water with a 5 fs prediction horizon. (A) Snapshot of an instantaneous
configuration of bulk water. (B) Comparison of the element-specific vibrational density of states (VDOS) between
TrajCast and MD. (C) Mean squared displacement (MSD) of oxygen atoms over a correlation time τ of up to 10 ps,
complementing the dynamic evaluation. (D) Validation of the molecular liquid structure based on the pairwise
combinations of chemical elements in the radial distribution function (RDF). The shaded areas represent the threefold
standard deviation, computed over 4 blocks. The diffusion coefficients are computed based on a fit to the slope in the
range from 1 to 10 ps following the procedure outlined in [59].
dynamics, we analyze the liquid’s structure by comparing the RDF, finding excellent agreement across all three pairwise
combinations of chemical elements shown in Fig. 4D. The only slight deviation occurs in the oxygen-oxygen RDF,
where TrajCast produces a slightly understructured liquid, consistent with the marginally higher diffusion coefficient.
While these benchmarks suggest that our methodology can accurately capture the dynamical and structural characteristics
of bulk liquids at room temperature, we believe TrajCast could be valuable for studying systems dominated by slow
dynamics, where long but challenging simulations are required [60 –62 ]. For deeply undercooled liquids, for instance,
these conditions may enable larger prediction horizons, though accurately accounting for cooperative effects and the
emergence of spatial and temporal heterogeneities remains essential [ 63 ]. Even with ∆t = 5.0 fs, however, TrajCast
generates over 1 ns of simulation for a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell with more than 5,000 atoms per day as highlighted in section
B.3 of the SI.
Scalability and Data Efficiency
So far, we have presented results for a single prediction horizon and a fixed number of training samples, both of which
are expected to significantly impact model performance. To explore this, we conduct additional experiments varying
both factors for all three systems and summarize the results in Fig 5. For each experiment, we train three identical
models varying only the randomly assigned initial weights. To facilitate comparison across systems, we express the
8
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure 5: Impact of prediction horizon and training set size on performance of TrajCast. (A) Parity plot comparing
predicted and reference velocities for TrajCast models trained for water with prediction horizons of 0.5 and 15 fs,
respectively. (B) Dependence of the relative velocity MAE on the MD time-step multiple. Error bars correspond to the
threefold standard deviations computed across three models varying in the initial weights. (C) Exponents from power
law fits to learning curves, quantifying the relationship between model accuracy and training set size across different
chemical systems and MD time-step multiples. The inset shows that these exponents correspond to the slope s of a
linear fit on a log-log plot of MAE versus training set size. The larger the absolute value of s the larger the improvement
on the generalization error of the model when additional data is used. The dashed lines serve as guide to the eye.
prediction horizon as a multiple of the original MD timestep (MTM) and focus on MAEs computed over a test set rather
than specific properties. We specifically choose the velocity MAE, as velocities remain consistent across different
prediction horizons within each system.
We first describe results from models trained on varying prediction horizons, using the same number of training samples
as in previous experiments. While scientists have developed an intuition for acceptable force errors in MLIPs over the
past decade, this understanding must first be established for velocity errors in TrajCast. To this end, we present a parity
plot for models trained on MTMs of 1 and 30 for water in Fig. 5A and achieving a velocity MAE of ≈ 3 × 10−6 Å/fs
and ≈ 4 × 10−4 Å/fs, respectively. These correspond to relative errors of ≈ 0.03% and ≈ 4.64% when expressed
with respect to the mean absolute velocity. Interestingly, the parity plot visually suggests two well-performing models
despite their MAE differing by over two orders of magnitude. However, during roll-out, none of the three models
with an MTM of 30 was able to produce a stable trajectory longer than a few ten-thousand steps. While MLIPs can
tolerate relative force errors of up to 30% [64 ], this indicates that TrajCast requires significantly smaller relative errors
to generate stable and physical trajectories.
To further explore the sensitivity with respect to the prediction horizon across the investigated systems, Fig. 5B shows
the relative velocity MAE for TrajCast for MTMs of 1, 2, 10, 20, and 30. In sections A.1 and A.2 of the SI, we report
the MAE for additional MTMs as well as the scaling of the displacement MAE, which follows a similar trend but with
consistently smaller relative errors by about 40%. For all systems, we find that the error increases with MTM with
water exhibiting exponential scaling and the steepest increase. While the molecular motion is highly correlated at
small time intervals, resulting in small errors, the system quickly decorrelates at larger MTMs due to the stochastic
motion of the fluid. It also becomes clear that the maximum acceptable model error depends on the specific system. For
instance, our model for crystalline quartz at a MTM of 30 produces stable trajectories despite a relative velocity MAE
of approximately 3.96%, whereas a TrajCast model for water at a MTM of 20 and a relative velocity MAE of 1.62%
may produce instabilities.
Arguably, a simple solution to stabilize large MTM models and speed up trajectory generation is to train on larger
datasets. To assess the impact of training set size on model performance across chemical systems and MTMs, we
train multiple TrajCast models with identical architecture on 10% and 50% of the dataset size used in the experiments
above. In section A.2 of the SI, we show the MAE for both displacements and velocities as a function of dataset
size across all systems and MTMs. These learning curves typically follow a power law [65 ], where the exponent s
determines how quickly model performance improves with more data. In Fig. 5C, we show s as a function of MTM
for all systems, with a schematic inset illustrating that s corresponds to the slope of a straight line in a log-log plot.
Interestingly, the dependence of s on MTM varies significantly across chemical space. While the curve for quartz
9
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
increases monotonically from ≈ −0.5 to ≈ −0.4, paracetamol and bulk water exhibit a non-monotonic relationship,
reaching a minimum at MTM ≈ 4 before increasing to smaller absolute values. Naturally, learning the system’s
evolution over larger time intervals is more difficult, requiring more data to capture the variety of potential new states
and reducing the absolute value of s.
Across the range of MTMs investigated, paracetamol consistently shows the largest slope, followed by water and quartz,
reflecting the varying constraints in each system: The atomic motion of quartz is coupled to its rigid lattice, while water
molecules can move more freely but remain strongly correlated with neighboring molecules. In contrast, gas-phase
paracetamol is solely governed by intramolecular interactions, requiring fewer examples to resolve, even at long time
intervals. These observations align with learning curve experiments with MLIPs, where s is roughly 3× larger for
MACE on an organic molecule [24 ] compared to NequIP for water [ 22]. Notably, their largest slopes are up to 4 times
smaller than those obtained for our models on similar systems, suggesting that incorporating velocities extracts more
information from each configuration, improving data efficiency. This enables training accurate TrajCast models on
dataset sizes similar to MLIPs, using just a few hundred picoseconds of trajectory data instead of the typical hundreds
of nanoseconds required by other methods [42, 43 , 45, 47 ] This is crucial as generating large datasets at ab initio
quality becomes infeasible due to the high computational cost, especially when scaling to multiple systems or building
foundation models.
Conclusion
We have introduced Trajcast, a new methodology based on autoregressive equivariant MPNNs to accelerate the
generation of accurate MD trajectories. Instead of predicting forces for numerical integration, our framework directly
updates velocities and positions, bypassing the need for small integration steps. We have benchmarked our methodology
on a variety of chemical systems ranging from a small molecule to condensed matter phases such as crystalline material
and bulk liquid. In all cases, TrajCast reliably reproduces structural, dynamical, and energetic properties, while enabling
10× to 30× larger time steps than traditional atomistic MD simulations. Importantly, TrajCast is transferable and scales
well to larger systems, allowing to generate over 1 ns of trajectory data per day for 1,728 water molecules and more
than 15 ns for a quartz supercell with more than 4,300 atoms. In contrast, the current MACE MLIP architecture, enables
MD simulations of about 1 ns for 1,000 atoms per day [36 ]. Notably, our models are trained using only a few hundred
ps of trajectory data, a quantity feasible to generate with AIMD. The current version of TrajCast operates with fixed
forecast horizon, however, future work will explore multi-time-step training to which could improve generalizibility
and accuracy over longer timescales, as demonstrated by a recent autoregressive GNN for weather forecasting [66 ].
The current force-free approach of TrajCast prevents the computation of pressure and other force-related properties,
restricting forecasting to the microcanonical (NVE) and canonical (NVT) ensembles. Extending the methodology to the
isobaric-isothermal (NpT) ensemble, however, will be an interesting avenue for future work. Additionally, although we
benchmarked our methodology on various systems beyond isolated molecules, it would be interesting to explore how it
performs when trained on multiple regions of chemical space simultaneously—an important step toward developing a
foundation model for molecular dynamics. While TrajCast has the potential to accelerate atomistic simulations and
material discovery in general, we believe a particularly promising application lies exploring slow physical phenomena
at low temperatures. In these systems, slow relaxation times not only require long simulation runs—as seen in a
recent study [ 67 ] on supercooled water that took several years to reach the microsecond scale—but also impose higher
correlations, potentially enabling to leverage larger forecasting horizons. Thus, TrajCast could greatly accelerate this
process, making large-scale simulations significantly more efficient. By addressing the long-standing challenge of
accessing long simulation times, our work could help bridge currently disjoint length scales—a key goal in many
scientific disciplines.
Methods
Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Atomistic Systems
MPNNs, a subclass of GNNs, learn mappings from molecular graphs to target properties such as the potential energy in
MLIPs. In these graphs, nodes represent atoms, connected by edges usually determined through a distance criterion.
Each node i has attributes like its atomic type Zi and position ri in three-dimensional (3D) Euclidean space. Depending
on the task, additional attributes may include the velocity vi or the force fi. Edge attributes typically consist of the
Euclidean vectors rij connecting two nodes i and j.
10
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
The local state of each node is encoded in latent features ht
i which are iteratively updated over T message passing layers.
In each layer t, nodes exchange information via messages mt
ij , aggregrated from all neighbors and used to update the
node’s latent state. Formally, this is expressed as [68]:
mt
i = X
j∈N (i)
mt
ij = X
j∈N (i)
M t(ht
i, ht
j , eij ) (4)
ht+1
i = U t(ht
i, mt
i) (5)
where N (i) represents the set of nodes connected to node i and M t and U t are arbitrary message and update functions
for layer t. While the original formulation omits node attributes in the update, advanced MLIPs like BOTNet [23 ] or
MACE [24 , 53 ] and other MPNN architectures like SEGNNs [51 ], incorporate them to prevent information loss across
layers. After T message passing steps, the final features may be pooled for global property prediction or passed through
a readout function directly for node properties.
The latent features ht
i can consist of various types of geometric objects, such as scalars, vectors or higher order tensors,
each transforming uniquely the Euclidean group E(3) operations of translation, rotation, and inversion. In practice,
however, it suffices to focus on the orthogonal group O(3) (rotations and reflections), as translational invariance is
ensured by using interatomic vectors rather than absolute positions. Transformations under O(3) are described by
irreducible representation (irreps) which are labelled by their rotation order l = 0, 1, 2, . . . and parity p ∈ (1, −1).
Scalars (l = 0, p = 1) remain invariant under rotation, while vectors (l = 1, p = −1) transform consistently
(equivariantly) with the geometry. If the features only depend on the atomic positions, formally each element of the
feature vector with rotation order L, ht
i,L, is equivariant under any rotation g = R ∈ O(3) if
ht
i,L(R · (r1, . . . , rN )) = DL(g)ht
i,L(r1, . . . , rN ) ∀g ∈ O(3) (6)
where R is the 3D rotation matrix parametrised by g and DL(g) is the Wigner D-matrix representing the equivalent
transformation in feature space. These symmetries can, in principle, be learned from augmented datasets comprising
rotated configurations. Alternatively, they can be explicitly incorporated into MPNNs by using equivariant message and
update functions, ensuring the network respects rotational symmetry by construction. The latter has become common
practice in state-of-the-art MLIPs [ 22 –25 ], where leveraging higher-order features beyond scalars has been shown to
significantly enhance accuracy.
Ensembles and Thermostats
By numerically integrating the equations of motion, MD simulations produce a trajectory that follows the distribution
of the microcanonical (NVE) ensemble, with a constant number of particles N , volume V , and total energy E. In this
ensemble, both the total linear momentum P and angular momentum L are conserved. However, since experiments
are usually conducted at constant temperature rather than energy, MD simulations are coupled to a heat bath via a
thermostat to sample from the canonical (NVT) ensemble, where the temperature T fluctuates around the desired value.
Microscopically, the temperature T of a N particle system is defined by
T = 2 K
Nf kB
with K = 1
2
NX
i=1
mi|vi|2 (7)
where K is the kinetic energy, mi is the mass of particle i, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and Nf corresponds to the
degrees of freedom, typically given as 3N − 3 for a 3D periodic system.
Velocity rescaling is the simplest method for adjusting a system to a target temperature, where atomic velocities are
rescaled at a predefined frequency by a factor α =
q
ˆK/K, with ˆK representing the target kinetic energy. However, this
method has several drawbacks, including failure to sample from the canonical ensemble, generation of discontinuities,
and violation of equipartition [ 69 ]. The canonical sampling through velocity rescaling (CSVR) thermostat [48 ]
overcomes these limitations by sampling ˆK from a canonical equilibrium distribution and rescaling the velocities after
each integration step. The coupling strength, defined by the relaxation time τ relative to the integration timestep, must
be chosen appropriately to maintain the target temperature without significantly altering the system’s dynamics.
Reference Data Sets
All data used for training and validation have been generated using classical MD simulations with the LAMMPS [70, 71 ]
software package. Training trajectories were generated in the NVE ensemble, while data to assess the roll-out
11
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
performance of the model architecture stems from NVT runs. To ensure that the NVE trajectories are at the desired
temperature, we first equilibrate the system in the NVT ensemble. During the equilibration period, the total energy is
sampled, and configurations with a total energy close to the distribution’s average are subsequently selected. The NVE
runs are then initiated from five configurations that are uniformly sampled from this subset, ensuring that the selected
snapshots are at least 1 ps apart. The specific simulation settings for each system are detailed below.
Paracetamol
An isolated paracetamol molecule is simulated in vacuum using the OPLS all-atom force field [72 , 73] instantiated with
Moltemplate [ 74]. We use a time-step of 0.5 fs due to the presence of hydrogen atoms. The system is first equilibrated
in the NVT ensemble for 25 ps (50,000 steps) using a Nosé-Hoover chain thermostat [75 ], with 10 chains, a damping
factor of 5 fs, and a target temperature of 300 K. This equilibration protocol is applied uniformly before subsequent
production runs in both the NVE and NVT ensembles. The NVE production runs are initiated from configurations
where the total energy is within a relative threshold of 0.001 from the mean of the distribution. For the NVT production
run, we utilise the CSVR thermostat [ 48 ], consistent with the setup in TrajCast, with a relaxation time of 50 fs. The
temperature is calculated based on 3N − 6 degrees of freedom. Net angular momentum is removed at each time-step
during NVT simulations, while in the NVE ensemble, this quantity is naturally conserved, maintaining an initial value
of 0. Production simulations are conducted for 100 ps (200,000 steps) in the NVE ensemble to generate training data,
and for 10 ns (20,000,000 steps) in the NVT ensemble for validation.
Quartz
Bulk α-quartz containing 162 atoms is simulated using the van Beest, Kramer, and Santen (BKS) potential [76] with
truncated Coulomb interactions [77 ] and a timestep of 1 fs. The system is equilibrated to 300 K in two stages: first in
the NpT ensemble at ambient pressure using the Berendsen barostat [78 ] for 10 ps (10,000 steps) with a relaxation time
of 0.1 ps, then in the NVT ensemble for 50 ps (50,000 steps) with Nosé-Hoover chain thermostat [75] with 3 chains
and a relaxation time of 0.1 ps. Production runs of 100 ps (100,000 steps) in the NVE ensemble are initiated from five
configurations randomly sampled from the equilibrated NVT trajectory, selecting those within a ±10 K range of the
target temperature. The minimum time separation between selected configurations is set to 0.1 ps. NVT simulations for
comparison with TrajCast predictions are carried out using the CSVR thermostat [ 48] with a relaxation time of 100 fs
and are performed for 15 ns (15,000,000 steps).
Liquid Water
Bulk water is modeled using a system of 64 water molecules in a cubic simulation box with a fixed length of 12.4172
Å. Intramolecular and intermolecular interactions of water is described by the flexible version of the simple point
charge (SPC) interaction potential [ 79 –81 ]. All MD simulations are carried out with a time-step of 0.5 fs. The system
is equilibrated for 10 ps (20,000 steps) in the NVT ensemble using a Nosé-Hoover thermostat [75 ] with a relaxation
time of 0.5 ps and a target temperature of 300 K. The temperature is calculated based on 3N − 3 degrees of freedom.
Production runs of 50 ps (100,000 steps) in the NVE ensemble are initiated from five configurations randomly sampled
from the equilibrated trajectory, selecting those within a ±20 K range of the target temperature. The minimum time
separation between selected configurations is set to 0.1 ps. Simulations in the NVT ensemble are carried out using the
CSVR thermostat [48] with a relaxation time of 50 fs and are performed for 2.5 ns (5,000,000 steps).
Model Size and Hyperparameters
All equivariant MPNNs in this work use both even (p = 1) and odd (p = −1) parity features up to an rotation
order of lmax = 2 creating a feature vector scalars, vectors, and higher-order tensors. We use 64 channels per
object, resulting in a feature vector described as a direct sum of irreps and expressed in e3nn [ 55 ] notation as 64 x
0o + 64 x 0e + 64 x 1o + 64 x 1e +64 x 2o + 64 x 2e, where each term specifies the multiplicity (first
number), rotation order l, and parity p (o for odd, e for even). For all experiments, we employ 4 message passing
layers and use SiLU and tanh as activation functions in the non-linear gates [ 52] for even and odd invariants, respectively.
The TrajCast MPNN contains approximately 2.2M learnable weights, most of which reside in the MLPs that process
the radial embeddings of edge and velocity magnitudes. Each MLP comprises three hidden layers with 64 neurons per
layer and uses SiLU activation functions. Identical to NequIP [22], for the radial embedding of the edge lengths we use
8 learnable Bessel functions and a polynomial cutoff with p = 6 [49 ]. Similarly, 8 Gaussian basis functions are used
to generate the encoding of atomic velocity magnitudes. The element-specific velocity encoding from equation 1 is
concatenated with the chemical species embeddings of each node to form the initial features passed to the first message
12
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
passing layer.
The cutoff radius for defining edges between nodes varies by system and is set to 4.0 Å, 4.5 Å, and 6.0 Å for
paracetamol, quartz, and liquid water, respectively. The upper bound of the radial embedding of the velocities is
determined by the lightest element, Zmin (hydrogen for water and paracetamol, oxygen for quartz), which governs the
maximum velocity. For this element, we calculate the theoretical expectation value of the RMS velocity, vMB
RMS,Zmin ,
based on the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. When training across multiple temperatures, we recommend computing
the RMS velocity for the highest temperature. We found that the upper limit of the encoding works then best when set
to values between 3.5 × vMB
RMS,Zmin and 5 × vMB
RMS,Zmin .
In all models, we refine the velocities predicted by the readout to remove any excess total linear momentum. While
angular momentum can be easily removed for isolated molecules such as paracetamol, a proper treatment is needed for
periodic systems like bulk quartz or liquid water, where particles crossing boundaries and interacting with periodic
images can introduce discontinuities and torques. A common approach is to treat the simulation box as an open system,
as suggested by Kuzkin [ 82 ]. However, for bulk systems investigated here, angular momentum conservation is typically
not a significant concern compared to more complex systems such as interfaces or multiphase systems, due to their
isotropic nature and symmetric forces. In fact, we find that all MPNNs perform well even without additional constraints,
with no significant excess angular momentum generated during the roll-out.
Training
All models are trained based on the loss function
L = 1
3 PNb
b=1 Na
NbX
b=1
NaX
i=1
λd
 c∆ri,α − ∆ri,α
2
+ λv (ˆvi,α − vi,α)2 (8)
where Nb denotes the batch size, Na is the number of atoms in each configuration within the batch, c∆ri,α and c∆vi,α
represent the predicted α-component of the displacement and velocity of atom i, respectively, and λd and λv control the
relative weighting of the displacement and velocity mean squared errors (MSE). For all experiments and independent of
the chosen prediction horizon of the model, we assign equal weights λd = λv = 0.5. The target vectors are normalized
by their root mean square (RMS) computed over the entire training set, and the model’s predictions are rescaled to
match the correct magnitude.
The weights are optimized with the Adam optimizer [83 ] using AMSGrad [84 ] and default values for β1 = 0.9 and
β2 = 0.999. The number of training samples varies across experiments, with models trained on 1,000, 5,000, and
10,000 configurations of paracetamol, and 500, 2,500, and 5,000 snapshots of quartz and liquid water. The results
reported in the experiments correspond to models trained on the maximum sample size, unless stated otherwise. All
training configurations are drawn randomly from three independent NVE trajectories of each system. The validation set
comprises a quarter of the training set size, and a fixed hold-out test set of 1,000 configurations is used to compute final
accuracy metrics. Both validation and test set are sampled from independent trajectories, ensuring no overlap with the
training set.
Irrespective of the training set size, a batch size of 10 for molecules and 2 for the condensed matter systems is used. The
initial learning rate of 0.01 is adjusted by an on-plateau scheduler that reduced the rate by a factor of 0.8 if the validation
loss does not improve over 20 epochs. Training continues for a maximum of 1,500 epochs, with early stopping if no
validation loss reduction is observed over 100 epochs. Hyperparameters for the optimizer, learning rate, and batch
size are optimized for the best balance between training time and model performance on the largest training set and
prediction horizons. Every experiment is performed using double precision. Both the model and training routine are
implemented using the PyTorch library [ 85 ]. All models are trained on a single NVIDIA V100-SXM2-32GB GPU,
with training durations of up to 5, 10, and 11 days for paracetamol, quartz, and water, respectively, many completing
earlier due to early stopping.
Trajectory Forecasting
All trajectories generated using TrajCast are produced autoregressively by rolling out the predictions of the MPNN, with
velocities being rescaled after each step using a CSVR thermostat [ 48 ]. As in classical MD simulations, the relaxation
time of the thermostat, τ , plays a crucial role and must be carefully chosen. In section B.1 of the SI, we explore
13
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
how TrajCast behaves with different values of τ for all systems and varying ∆t. We find that for larger prediction
horizons, much lower relaxation times are required compared to typical MD values to maintain the target temperature
and fluctuations. This is likely due to TrajCast implicitly performing multiple timesteps before rescaling, whereas in
MD, velocities are rescaled after each step. For the reported experiments, we set τ to 10 × ∆t (70 fs) for paracetamol,
2.5 × ∆t (75 fs) for α-quartz, and 10 × ∆t (50 fs) for liquid water. The target temperature for all systems is 300 K
and is defined based on 3N − 6 and 3N − 3 degrees of freedom for paracetamol and the condensed matter systems,
respectively. Initial velocities are sampled from a Gaussian distribution at 300 K with zero net linear and angular
momentum. For paracetamol, the net angular momentum is zeroed every 100 forward passes to correct for the excess
angular momentum induced by the CSVR thermostat. For paracetamol we produce a trajectory of 7 ns (1,000,000
forward passes), while for water and quartz, the roll-out is performed over 500,000 iterations, corresponding to 2 ns and
15 ns, respectively. All systems are equilibrated for 10% of the total number of forward passes used for production.
In addition to PyTorch [ 85 ], e3nn [55 ], and cuEquivariance, we also use the ASE [86] python package to efficiently
generate and save the trajectories.
Data and Code Availability
An open-source implementation of TrajCast is available at https://github.com/IBM/trajcast for training models
and performing trajectory forecasting. The model weights used in the experiments on various chemical systems are
available at https://huggingface.co/ibm-research/trajcast.models-arxiv2025. The training, validation,
and testing datasets for these experiments can be accessed at https://huggingface.co/datasets/ibm-research/
trajcast.datasets-arxiv2025.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Benjamin I. Tan, Christoph Schran, Clyde Fare, Edward O. Pyzer-Knapp, Eldad Haber, Johannes
Brandstetter, Lior Horesh, Ljiljana Stojanovic, and Will Trojak for fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the
Hartree National Centre for Digital Innovation, a collaboration between the Science and Technology Facilities Council
and IBM.
Author Contributions
F.L.T. designed research; F.L.T., T.R. and M.E. performed experiments; F.L.T., T.R., and M.E. wrote the code; F.L.T.,
J.D.O.-P., T.T., and F.M. generated data; all authors analyzed data; and all authors wrote the paper.
Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interest.
References
[1] Michael Levitt and Arieh Warshel. Computer simulation of protein folding. Nature, 253(5494):694–698, February
1975.
[2] Kresten Lindorff-Larsen, Stefano Piana, Ron O. Dror, and David E. Shaw. How Fast-Folding Proteins Fold.
Science, 334(6055):517–520, October 2011.
[3] Xiao Dong, Artem R. Oganov, Alexander F. Goncharov, Elissaios Stavrou, Sergey Lobanov, Gabriele Saleh,
Guang-Rui Qian, Qiang Zhu, Carlo Gatti, Volker L. Deringer, Richard Dronskowski, Xiang-Feng Zhou, Vitali B.
Prakapenka, Zuzana Konôpková, Ivan A. Popov, Alexander I. Boldyrev, and Hui-Tian Wang. A stable compound
of helium and sodium at high pressure. Nature Chem, 9(5):440–445, May 2017.
[4] C. Cavazzoni, G. L. Chiarotti, S. Scandolo, E. Tosatti, M. Bernasconi, and M. Parrinello. Superionic and Metallic
States of Water and Ammonia at Giant Planet Conditions. Science, 283(5398):44–46, January 1999.
[5] Jiming Sun, Bryan K. Clark, Salvatore Torquato, and Roberto Car. The phase diagram of high-pressure superionic
ice. Nat Commun, 6(1):8156, August 2015.
[6] Maria Rescigno, Alberto Toffano, Umbertoluca Ranieri, Leon Andriambariarijaona, Richard Gaal, Stefan Klotz,
Michael Marek Koza, Jacques Ollivier, Fausto Martelli, John Russo, Francesco Sciortino, Jose Teixeira, and
Livia Eleonora Bove. Observation of Plastic Ice VII by Quasi-Elastic Neutron Scattering. Nature, February 2025.
14
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
[7] Srikanth Sastry and C. Austen Angell. Liquid–liquid phase transition in supercooled silicon. Nature Mater,
2(11):739–743, November 2003.
[8] Peter H. Poole, Francesco Sciortino, Ulrich Essmann, and H. Eugene Stanley. Phase behaviour of metastable
water. Nature, 360(6402):324–328, November 1992.
[9] Jeremy C. Palmer, Fausto Martelli, Yang Liu, Roberto Car, Athanassios Z. Panagiotopoulos, and Pablo G.
Debenedetti. Metastable liquid–liquid transition in a molecular model of water. Nature, 510(7505):385–388, June
2014.
[10] Alexander Rosu-Finsen, Michael B. Davies, Alfred Amon, Han Wu, Andrea Sella, Angelos Michaelides, and
Christoph G. Salzmann. Medium-density amorphous ice. Science, 379(6631):474–478, February 2023.
[11] Giuseppe Cassone and Fausto Martelli. Electrofreezing of liquid water at ambient conditions. Nat Commun,
15(1):1856, February 2024.
[12] Zhao Fan and Hajime Tanaka. Microscopic mechanisms of pressure-induced amorphous-amorphous transitions
and crystallisation in silicon. Nat Commun, 15(1):368, January 2024.
[13] Albert Musaelian, Anders Johansson, Simon Batzner, and Boris Kozinsky. Scaling the leading accuracy of deep
equivariant models to biomolecular simulations of realistic size, April 2023. arXiv:2304.10061 [physics, q-bio].
[14] Venkat Kapil, Christoph Schran, Andrea Zen, Ji Chen, Chris J. Pickard, and Angelos Michaelides. The first-
principles phase diagram of monolayer nanoconfined water. Nature, 609(7927):512–516, September 2022.
[15] Volker L. Deringer, Noam Bernstein, Gábor Csányi, Chiheb Ben Mahmoud, Michele Ceriotti, Mark Wilson,
David A. Drabold, and Stephen R. Elliott. Origins of structural and electronic transitions in disordered silicon.
Nature, 589(7840):59–64, January 2021.
[16] Jörg Behler and Michele Parrinello. Generalized Neural-Network Representation of High-Dimensional Potential-
Energy Surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett., 98(14):146401, April 2007.
[17] Albert P. Bartók, Mike C. Payne, Risi Kondor, and Gábor Csányi. Gaussian Approximation Potentials: The
Accuracy of Quantum Mechanics, without the Electrons. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104(13):136403, April 2010.
[18] Kristof Schütt, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Huziel Enoc Sauceda Felix, Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko,
and Klaus-Robert Müller. SchNet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum
interactions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pages 992 – 1002, 2017.
[19] Oliver T. Unke and Markus Meuwly. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, Dipole
Moments, and Partial Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 15(6):3678–3693, June 2019.
[20] Ralf Drautz. Atomic cluster expansion for accurate and transferable interatomic potentials. Phys. Rev. B,
99(1):014104, January 2019.
[21] Oliver T. Unke, Stefan Chmiela, Michael Gastegger, Kristof T. Schütt, Huziel E. Sauceda, and Klaus-Robert
Müller. SpookyNet: Learning force fields with electronic degrees of freedom and nonlocal effects. Nat Commun,
12(1):7273, December 2021.
[22] Simon Batzner, Albert Musaelian, Lixin Sun, Mario Geiger, Jonathan P. Mailoa, Mordechai Kornbluth, Nicola
Molinari, Tess E. Smidt, and Boris Kozinsky. E(3)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks for Data-Efficient and
Accurate Interatomic Potentials. Nat Commun, 13(1):2453, 2022.
[23] Ilyes Batatia, Simon Batzner, Dávid Péter Kovács, Albert Musaelian, Gregor N. C. Simm, Ralf Drautz, Christoph
Ortner, Boris Kozinsky, and Gábor Csányi. The design space of E(3)-equivariant atom-centred interatomic
potentials. Nat Mach Intell, 7(1):56–67, 2025.
[24] Ilyes Batatia, David P Kovacs, Gregor Simm, Christoph Ortner, and Gabor Csanyi. MACE: Higher Order
Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force Fields. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 35, pages 11423–11436, 2022.
[25] Albert Musaelian, Simon Batzner, Anders Johansson, Lixin Sun, Cameron J. Owen, Mordechai Kornbluth, and
Boris Kozinsky. Learning local equivariant representations for large-scale atomistic dynamics. Nat Commun,
14(1):579, February 2023.
[26] Stefan Chmiela, Valentin Vassilev-Galindo, Oliver T. Unke, Adil Kabylda, Huziel E. Sauceda, Alexandre
Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Accurate global machine learning force fields for molecules with hundreds
of atoms. Sci. Adv., 9(2):eadf0873, January 2023.
[27] Stephen R. Xie, Matthias Rupp, and Richard G. Hennig. Ultra-fast interpretable machine-learning potentials. npj
Comput Mater, 9(1):162, September 2023.
15
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
[28] Volker L. Deringer, Miguel A. Caro, and Gábor Csányi. Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials as Emerging
Tools for Materials Science. Advanced Materials, 31(46):1902765, November 2019.
[29] Oliver T. Unke, Stefan Chmiela, Huziel E. Sauceda, Michael Gastegger, Igor Poltavsky, Kristof T. Schütt,
Alexandre Tkatchenko, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Machine Learning Force Fields. Chem. Rev., 121(16):10142–
10186, August 2021.
[30] Jörg Behler. Four Generations of High-Dimensional Neural Network Potentials. Chem. Rev., 121(16):10037–
10072, August 2021.
[31] Fabian L Thiemann, Niamh O’Neill, Venkat Kapil, Angelos Michaelides, and Christoph Schran. Introduction to
machine learning potentials for atomistic simulations. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 37(7):073002, February 2025.
[32] Chi Chen, Weike Ye, Yunxing Zuo, Chen Zheng, and Shyue Ping Ong. Graph Networks as a Universal Machine
Learning Framework for Molecules and Crystals. Chem. Mater., 31(9):3564–3572, May 2019.
[33] Chi Chen and Shyue Ping Ong. A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for the periodic table. Nat
Comput Sci, 2(11):718–728, November 2022.
[34] Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Muratahan Aykol, Gowoon Cheon, and Ekin Dogus
Cubuk. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature, 624(7990):80–85, December 2023.
[35] Han Yang, Chenxi Hu, Yichi Zhou, Xixian Liu, Yu Shi, Jielan Li, Guanzhi Li, Zekun Chen, Shuizhou Chen,
Claudio Zeni, Matthew Horton, Robert Pinsler, Andrew Fowler, Daniel Zügner, Tian Xie, Jake Smith, Lixin Sun,
Qian Wang, Lingyu Kong, Chang Liu, Hongxia Hao, and Ziheng Lu. MatterSim: A Deep Learning Atomistic
Model Across Elements, Temperatures and Pressures, May 2024. arXiv:2405.04967 [cond-mat].
[36] Ilyes Batatia, Philipp Benner, Yuan Chiang, Alin M. Elena, Dávid P. Kovács, Janosh Riebesell, Xavier R.
Advincula, Mark Asta, Matthew Avaylon, William J. Baldwin, Fabian Berger, Noam Bernstein, Arghya Bhowmik,
Samuel M. Blau, Vlad C˘arare, James P. Darby, Sandip De, Flaviano Della Pia, Volker L. Deringer, Rokas Elijošius,
Zakariya El-Machachi, Fabio Falcioni, Edvin Fako, Andrea C. Ferrari, Annalena Genreith-Schriever, Janine
George, Rhys E. A. Goodall, Clare P. Grey, Petr Grigorev, Shuang Han, Will Handley, Hendrik H. Heenen,
Kersti Hermansson, Christian Holm, Jad Jaafar, Stephan Hofmann, Konstantin S. Jakob, Hyunwook Jung, Venkat
Kapil, Aaron D. Kaplan, Nima Karimitari, James R. Kermode, Namu Kroupa, Jolla Kullgren, Matthew C. Kuner,
Domantas Kuryla, Guoda Liepuoniute, Johannes T. Margraf, Ioan-Bogdan Magd˘au, Angelos Michaelides, J. Harry
Moore, Aakash A. Naik, Samuel P. Niblett, Sam Walton Norwood, Niamh O’Neill, Christoph Ortner, Kristin A.
Persson, Karsten Reuter, Andrew S. Rosen, Lars L. Schaaf, Christoph Schran, Benjamin X. Shi, Eric Sivonxay,
Tamás K. Stenczel, Viktor Svahn, Christopher Sutton, Thomas D. Swinburne, Jules Tilly, Cas van der Oord,
Eszter Varga-Umbrich, Tejs Vegge, Martin Vondrák, Yangshuai Wang, William C. Witt, Fabian Zills, and Gábor
Csányi. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry, March 2024. arXiv:2401.00096 [cond-mat,
physics:physics].
[37] Mark E. Tuckerman, Glenn J. Martyna, and Bruce J. Berne. Molecular dynamics algorithm for condensed systems
with multiple time scales. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 93(2):1287–1291, July 1990.
[38] M. Tuckerman, B. J. Berne, and G. J. Martyna. Reversible multiple time scale molecular dynamics. The Journal
of Chemical Physics, 97(3):1990–2001, August 1992.
[39] Xiang Fu, Albert Musaelian, Anders Johansson, Tommi Jaakkola, and Boris Kozinsky. Learning Interatomic
Potentials at Multiple Scales, October 2023. arXiv:2310.13756 [physics].
[40] Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilibrium states of
many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457):eaaw1147, September 2019.
[41] Ludwig Winkler, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Huziel E Sauceda. High-fidelity molecular dynamics trajectory
reconstruction with bi-directional neural networks. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol., 3(2):025011, June 2022.
[42] J C S Kadupitiya, Geoffrey C Fox, and Vikram Jadhao. Solving Newton’s equations of motion with large timesteps
using recurrent neural networks based operators. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol., 3(2):025002, June 2022.
[43] Leon Klein, Andrew Y. K. Foong, Tor Erlend Fjelde, Bruno Mlodozeniec, Marc Brockschmidt, Sebastian Nowozin,
Frank Noé, and Ryota Tomioka. Timewarp: transferable acceleration of molecular dynamics by learning time-
coarsened dynamics. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
[44] Mathias Schreiner, Ole Winther, and Simon Olsson. Implicit transfer operator learning: Multiple time-resolution
models for molecular dynamics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 36, pages
36449–36462, 2023.
[45] Bowen Jing, Hannes Stärk, Tommi Jaakkola, and Bonnie Berger. Generative Modeling of Molecular Dynamics
Trajectories, September 2024. arXiv:2409.17808 [cs, q-bio].
16
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
[46] Minkai Xu, Jiaqi Han, Aaron Lou, Jean Kossaifi, Arvind Ramanathan, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Jure Leskovec,
Stefano Ermon, and Anima Anandkumar. Equivariant Graph Neural Operator for Modeling 3D Dynamics, June
2024. arXiv:2401.11037 [cs].
[47] Xiang Fu, Tian Xie, Nathan J. Rebello, Bradley Olsen, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Simulate Time-integrated
Coarse-grained Molecular Dynamics with Multi-scale Graph Networks. Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2023.
[48] Giovanni Bussi, Davide Donadio, and Michele Parrinello. Canonical sampling through velocity rescaling. The
Journal of Chemical Physics, 126(1):014101, January 2007.
[49] Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional Message Passing for Molecular Graphs.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
[50] Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick Riley. Tensor field
networks: Rotation- and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3D point clouds, May 2018. arXiv:1802.08219
[cs].
[51] Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik J Bekkers, and Max Welling. Geometric and physical
quantities improve e(3) equivariant message passing. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2022.
[52] Maurice Weiler, Mario Geiger, Max Welling, Wouter Boomsma, and Taco S Cohen. 3D Steerable CNNs: Learning
Rotationally Equivariant Features in Volumetric Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
2018.
[53] Dávid Péter Kovács, Ilyes Batatia, Eszter Sára Arany, and Gábor Csányi. Evaluation of the MACE force field
architecture: From medicinal chemistry to materials science. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 159(4):044118,
July 2023.
[54] Kimberly Stachenfeld, Drummond B Fielding, Dmitrii Kochkov, Miles Cranmer, Tobias Pfaff, Jonathan Godwin,
Can Cui, Shirley Ho, Peter Battaglia, and Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez. LEARNED COARSE MODELS FOR
EFFICIENT TURBULENCE SIMULATION. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2022.
[55] Mario Geiger and Tess Smidt. e3nn: Euclidean Neural Networks, July 2022. arXiv:2207.09453 [cs].
[56] Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Huziel E. Sauceda, Igor Poltavsky, Kristof T. Schütt, and Klaus-Robert
Müller. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields. Sci. Adv., 3(5):e1603015, May
2017.
[57] Anders S Christensen and O Anatole Von Lilienfeld. On the role of gradients for machine learning of molecular
energies and forces. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol., 1(4):045018, October 2020.
[58] Christoph Schran, Fabian L. Thiemann, Patrick Rowe, Erich A. Müller, Ondrej Marsalek, and Angelos
Michaelides. Machine learning potentials for complex aqueous systems made simple. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A., 118(38):e2110077118, September 2021.
[59] Ondrej Marsalek and Thomas E. Markland. Quantum Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Ab Initio Liquid Water: The
Interplay of Nuclear and Electronic Quantum Effects. J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 8(7):1545–1551, April 2017.
[60] C. A. Angell. Formation of Glasses from Liquids and Biopolymers. Science, 267(5206):1924–1935, March 1995.
Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
[61] Pablo G. Debenedetti and Frank H. Stillinger. Supercooled liquids and the glass transition. Nature, 410(6825):259–
267, March 2001.
[62] Camille Scalliet, Benjamin Guiselin, and Ludovic Berthier. Thirty Milliseconds in the Life of a Supercooled
Liquid. Phys. Rev. X, 12(4):041028, December 2022.
[63] Kevin Stokely, Marco G. Mazza, H. Eugene Stanley, and Giancarlo Franzese. Effect of hydrogen bond cooperativity
on the behavior of water. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 107(4):1301–1306, January 2010.
[64] Penghua Ying, Cheng Qian, Rui Zhao, Yanzhou Wang, Ke Xu, Feng Ding, Shunda Chen, and
Zheyong Fan. Advances in modeling complex materials: The rise of neuroevolution potentials.
Chemical Physics Reviews, 6(1):011310, March 2025. _eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/cpr/article-
pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0259061/20445326/011310_1_5.0259061.pdf.
[65] Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
Md Mostofa Ali Patwary, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep Learning Scaling is Predictable, Empirically,
December 2017. arXiv:1712.00409 [cs].
17
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
[66] Remi Lam, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Willson, Peter Wirnsberger, Meire Fortunato, Ferran Alet, Suman
Ravuri, Timo Ewalds, Zach Eaton-Rosen, Weihua Hu, Alexander Merose, Stephan Hoyer, George Holland, Oriol
Vinyals, Jacklynn Stott, Alexander Pritzel, Shakir Mohamed, and Peter Battaglia. Learning skillful medium-range
global weather forecasting. Science, 382(6677):1416–1421, December 2023.
[67] F. Sciortino, Y. Zhai, S. L. Bore, and F. Paesani. Constraints on the location of the liquid–liquid critical point in
water. Nat. Phys., 21(3):480–485, March 2025.
[68] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural Message Passing
for Quantum Chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, Sydney,
Australia, 2017.
[69] Efrem Braun, Seyed Mohamad Moosavi, and Berend Smit. Anomalous Effects of Velocity Rescaling Algorithms:
The Flying Ice Cube Effect Revisited. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 14(10):5262–5272, October 2018.
[70] Steve Plimpton. Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. Journal of Computational
Physics, 117(1):1–19, March 1995.
[71] Aidan P. Thompson, H. Metin Aktulga, Richard Berger, Dan S. Bolintineanu, W. Michael Brown, Paul S. Crozier,
Pieter J. In ’T Veld, Axel Kohlmeyer, Stan G. Moore, Trung Dac Nguyen, Ray Shan, Mark J. Stevens, Julien
Tranchida, Christian Trott, and Steven J. Plimpton. LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based
materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales. Computer Physics Communications, 271:108171,
February 2022.
[72] William L. Jorgensen and Julian Tirado-Rives. The OPLS [optimized potentials for liquid simulations] potential
functions for proteins, energy minimizations for crystals of cyclic peptides and crambin. J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
110(6):1657–1666, March 1988.
[73] Michael J. Robertson, Julian Tirado-Rives, and William L. Jorgensen. Improved Peptide and Protein Torsional
Energetics with the OPLS-AA Force Field. J. Chem. Theory Comput., 11(7):3499–3509, July 2015.
[74] Andrew I. Jewett, David Stelter, Jason Lambert, Shyam M. Saladi, Otello M. Roscioni, Matteo Ricci, Ludovic
Autin, Martina Maritan, Saeed M. Bashusqeh, Tom Keyes, Remus T. Dame, Joan-Emma Shea, Grant J. Jensen,
and David S. Goodsell. Moltemplate: A Tool for Coarse-Grained Modeling of Complex Biological Matter and
Soft Condensed Matter Physics. Journal of Molecular Biology, 433(11):166841, May 2021.
[75] Glenn J. Martyna, Michael L. Klein, and Mark Tuckerman. Nosé–Hoover chains: The canonical ensemble via
continuous dynamics. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 97(4):2635–2643, August 1992.
[76] B. W. H. van Beest, G. J. Kramer, and R. A. van Santen. Force fields for silicas and aluminophosphates based on
ab initio calculations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 64(16):1955–1958, April 1990. Publisher: American Physical Society.
[77] Antoine Carré, Ludovic Berthier, Jürgen Horbach, Simona Ispas, and Walter Kob. Amorphous silica modeled with
truncated and screened Coulomb interactions: A molecular dynamics simulation study. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 127(11):114512, September 2007.
[78] H. J. C. Berendsen, J. P. M. Postma, W. F. van Gunsteren, A. DiNola, and J. R. Haak. Molecular dynamics with
coupling to an external bath. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 81(8):3684–3690, October 1984.
[79] Kahled Toukan and Aneesur Rahman. Molecular-dynamics study of atomic motions in water. Phys. Rev. B,
31(5):2643–2648, March 1985. Publisher: American Physical Society.
[80] Yujie Wu, Harald L. Tepper, and Gregory A. Voth. Flexible simple point-charge water model with improved
liquid-state properties. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 124(2):024503, January 2006.
[81] Konstantin Smirnov. A molecular dynamics study of the interaction of water with external surface of silicalite-1.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 19, January 2016.
[82] Vitaly A. Kuzkin. On angular momentum balance for particle systems with periodic boundary conditions. Z
Angew Math Mech, 95(11):1290–1295, November 2015. arXiv:1312.7008 [physics].
[83] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization, January 2017. arXiv:1412.6980
[cs].
[84] Sashank J. Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the Convergence of Adam and Beyond, April 2019.
arXiv:1904.09237 [cs].
[85] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito,
Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala.
PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library, December 2019. arXiv:1912.01703
[cs].
18
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
[86] Ask Hjorth Larsen, Jens Jørgen Mortensen, Jakob Blomqvist, Ivano E Castelli, Rune Christensen, Marcin Dułak,
Jesper Friis, Michael N Groves, Bjørk Hammer, Cory Hargus, Eric D Hermes, Paul C Jennings, Peter Bjerre Jensen,
James Kermode, John R Kitchin, Esben Leonhard Kolsbjerg, Joseph Kubal, Kristen Kaasbjerg, Steen Lysgaard,
Jón Bergmann Maronsson, Tristan Maxson, Thomas Olsen, Lars Pastewka, Andrew Peterson, Carsten Rostgaard,
Jakob Schiøtz, Ole Schütt, Mikkel Strange, Kristian S Thygesen, Tejs Vegge, Lasse Vilhelmsen, Michael Walter,
Zhenhua Zeng, and Karsten W Jacobsen. The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for working with
atoms. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 29(27):273002, July 2017.
[87] Daan Frenkel and Berend Smit. Understanding Molecular Simulation. Elsevier, 2nd edition, 2002.
[88] J. Hickman and Y. Mishin. Temperature fluctuations in canonical systems: Insights from molecular dynamics
simulations. Phys. Rev. B, 94(18):184311, November 2016.
19
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Supplementary Information
In this supplementary information, we provide further details on specific aspects of the study presented in the manuscript.
This includes additional metrics to evaluate the proposed methodology, as well as various aspects related to inference
and generating new trajectories.
Contents
A Model Performance S2
A.1 Mean Absolute Errors for Displacements and Velocities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S2
A.2 Learning Curves Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S2
B Trajectory Forecasting S4
B.1 Thermostat Relaxation Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S4
B.2 Forecasting at Constant Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S5
B.3 Forecasting Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . S6
S1
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
A Model Performance
In this section, we provide additional details supporting the validation of our framework as presented in the manuscript.
Specifically, we include an overview of the mean absolute error (MAE) across all systems for message passing neural
networks (MPNNs) trained on the largest pool of training configurations. Furthermore, we present additional results of
the scalability and learning curve experiments to examine the impact of the prediction horizon and data efficiency.
A.1 Mean Absolute Errors for Displacements and Velocities
Here, we report the MAE for displacements and velocities predicted by the equivariant MPNNs for all systems
investigated in the manuscript for a range of prediction horizons ∆t. Detailed results are provided in Table S1. The
MAEs are calculated using ∆t-specific hold-out test sets, each comprising 1, 000 atomic snapshots sampled from NVE
trajectories not used for training or validation. In addition to the absolute errors, we also report them relative to the
mean absolute values of the displacement and velocity vectors. This is important, as the average magnitude of the
displacement vector is strongly dependent on the chosen prediction interval ∆t. While we performed experiments with
varying training set sizes and three different seeds, here we report the best models obtained with the largest number of
training training samples.
Table S1: Displacement and velocity MAE for the systems studied at varying prediction horizons ∆t. Models for
paracetamol were trained on a dataset of 10, 000 atomic structures, whereas models for α-quartz and liquid water had a
training budget of 5, 000 samples each. The MAEs are computed for hold-out test sets with varying ∆t comprising
1, 000 configurations, respectively. Beyond absolute values in [Å] and [Å/fs], we also report the errors relative to mean
absolute displacement and velocity of the test set.
System Prediction horizon ∆t [fs] Displacement Velocity
Abs [10−5 × Å] Rel [%] Abs [10−5 × Å/fs] Rel [%]
Paracetamol
0.5 0.15 0.04 0.52 0.07
1.0 0.41 0.06 0.71 0.10
2.0 1.56 0.11 1.42 0.20
3.0 3.59 0.17 2.12 0.29
5.0 7.98 0.24 3.05 0.42
7.0 15.89 0.38 4.92 0.68
10.0 31.91 0.59 7.88 1.08
15.0 76.07 1.09 14.07 1.93
Quartz
1.0 0.16 0.06 0.32 0.11
2.0 0.66 0.11 0.64 0.22
5.0 4.71 0.33 1.80 0.63
10.0 18.51 0.69 3.37 1.18
20.0 66.90 1.50 6.77 2.36
30.0 141.24 2.52 11.37 3.96
50.0 380.39 5.51 25.13 8.76
Water
0.5 0.08 0.02 0.31 0.03
1.0 0.24 0.03 0.45 0.05
2.0 0.91 0.05 0.88 0.09
5.0 6.99 0.17 3.46 0.37
7.0 15.38 0.29 6.38 0.68
10.0 47.23 0.67 15.25 1.63
15.0 199.04 2.04 43.47 4.64
20.0 507.98 4.30 84.37 9.11
A.2 Learning Curves Experiments
In this section we provide a full overview of the learning curves for both displacements and velocities. The relative
displacement and velocity MAEs for all systems and investigated MD time-step multiples (MTM) are shown as a
S2
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
Figure S1: Learning curves capturing the relationship between model accuracy and training set size across
chemical systems and MD time-step multiples. Top panels show the displacement MAE for paracetamol, quartz, and
water, while the bottom panel displays the velocity MAE, both on a log-log scale. The MAEs were computed over
a test set of 1,000 configurations and normalized by the mean of the displacements and velocities respectively. For
each MTM and number of training samples we show the error for three models of identical architecture only differing
in their initial weights and order they were fed with training samples. The continuous lines are fits to a power law to
determine how fast the models learn when presented with additional data.
function of number of training samples in Fig. S1. As in the manuscript, the MAEs are normalized by the mean
of the respective property sampled over the test set comprising 1,000 configurations. Models were trained to 1,000,
5,000, and 10,000 or 500, 2,500, and 5,000 configurations for paracetamol and the condensed matter systems quartz
and water, respectively. For each combination of system, MTM, and number of training samples, we conducted three
training runs to also study variation across different seeds. We then fitted a power law [65 ] MAE ∝ N s, where N is
the number of training configurations and s corresponds to the exponent quantifying how much the model improves
with more data, to the generated data which appear as straight lines with slope s in the log-log plot. This allows us to
compare data efficiency across systems and prediction horizons. In the manuscript, we already discussed differences in
the scaling behavior across systems and MTMs based on the velocity MAE. The displacement MAE shows almost
the identical relationship with respect to the number of training data suggesting a very similar exponent s. We note,
however, that the displacement MAE are consistently shifted to smaller MAEs across MTMs and number of training
samples for all systems. While we assigned equal weights to velocities and displacements in the loss function, this
suggests opportunities for further optimization in future work.
S3
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
B Trajectory Forecasting
While the previous section focused on single-step prediction accuracy, here we provide additional details related to the
autoregressive roll-outs and trajectory generation. Specifically, we investigate the impact of thermostat strength over
different prediction horizons, demonstrate the generation of stable trajectories in NVE for short periods, and benchmark
TrajCast inference timings across systems.
B.1 Thermostat Relaxation Time
The relaxation time τ of a thermostat is a crucial parameter in classical MD simulations. If chosen too high, the
thermostat cannot maintain the target temperature; if too low, it becomes overly strong, disrupting the system’s
dynamics and fluctuations. Typically, τ is expressed relative to the integration time-step δt and is chosen to be
≈ 100 − 1000 × δt. However, it is unclear if the same rule of thumb applies to the methodology introduced in the
manuscript. While the CSVR thermostat [48 ] is designed to rescale velocities after each numerical integration step
within the NVE ensemble, our trained MPNNs implicitly perform multiple NVE steps before rescaling the velocities.
Here, we perform a comprehensive analysis for all systems reported in the manuscript, investigating how different
relaxation times affect the temperature of trajectories generated with varying prediction horizons ∆t. Specifically,
we focus on three relaxation times, τ = 10, 50, and 100 times ∆t, across various prediction horizons. For each
combination of τ and ∆t, we generate three trajectories by rolling out the MPNNs trained at the respective ∆t in the
NVT ensemble, varying the seed of the thermostat and the initial velocities. Each trajectory consists of 100, 000 steps,
with the first half truncated for equilibration.
In addition to the deviation of the ensemble average temperature, ⟨T ⟩, from the target temperature T0 = 300 K, we also
evaluate the standard deviation of the temperature, σT , which is expected to follow the relationship [87, 88]:
σT =
r 2
3N T0 (1)
where N is the number of atoms in the system. An overview of these properties is provided in Fig. S2. While the
thermostat achieves the correct target temperature and fluctuations independent of the chosen relaxation time for short
Figure S2: Impact of thermostat relaxation time on temperature at different prediction intervals. Top panels
show the absolute deviation from the target temperature T0 = 300 K for the three systems, while bottom panels show
the temperature standard deviation, σT , computed from the trajectory. The purple lines correspond to the theoretical
expectation for σT from equation 1. Errors bars represent twice the standard deviation across three different seeds. The
dashed lines serve as guides to the eye.
S4
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
prediction horizons, significant differences emerge when ∆t is increased. The weakest coupling (τ = 100 × ∆t) fails
to maintain the target temperature for large prediction horizons, with deviations up to ≈ 15 K for paracetamol and
≈ 40 K for quartz, respectively. While setting τ = 50 × ∆t reduces the error, only the strongest thermostat performs
satisfactory with deviations ≤ 1 K, except for α-quartz using ∆t = 30 fs, which requires an even lower τ . We observe
the same trends in temperature fluctuations based on the standard deviation, where for large prediction horizons, a weak
thermostat introduces larger errors. Beyond affecting ensemble averages and properties, in the course of this work we
observed that excessive deviations in the target temperature can induce instabilities. All this indicates that significantly
smaller relative relaxation times are required when using large prediction horizons to accurately reproduce the NVT
ensemble.
B.2 Forecasting at Constant Energy
While the CSVR thermostat enables TrajCast to generate trajectories at constant temperature within the canonical
ensemble, the MPNNs driving our framework mimic the system’s temporal evolution in the NVE ensemble. Specifically,
we trained these models to predict the new state after multiple steps of numerical integration of the equations of
motion using the velocity Verlet algorithm. Although velocity rescaling stabilizes the roll-out, here, we show that our
models can also generate stable trajectories without noise injection, closely following the MD reference. To this end,
we autoregressively generate trajectories without a thermostat using MPNNs trained to paracetamol with prediction
horizons of ∆t = 0.5 fs and ∆t = 7.0 fs, corresponding to MD time-step multiples (MTM) of 1 and 14, respectively,
and compare them to a MD NVE trajectory started from the same state. Each trajectory was generated over 1,000 steps.
Unlike benchmarking in the NVT ensemble, the lack of non-deterministic rescaling allows for a direct comparison
Figure S3: Comparison of TrajCast and MD trajectories of paracetamol in the NVE ensemble. The MD trajectories
were generated using a time-step of 0.5 fs and we compare to TrajCast roll-out based on prediction horizons of 0.5 fs
and 7.0 fs, corresponding to MTMs of 1 and 14, respectively. The molecular snapshots on the left highlight different
features such as interatomic distances and angles which are used to validate the model performance. The right panels
show the respective metrics as a function of time of up to 500 fs corresponding to 1,000 MD steps.
S5
Force-Free Molecular Dynamics Through Autoregressive Equivariant Networks
of the trajectories based on the divergence of atomic positions or velocities. Similar to [41 ], in Fig. S3, we compare
specific interatomic distances and angles of paracetamol as a function of time. To resolve the model performance
across different frequency ranges, we pick the oxygen-oxygen and nitrogen-hydrogen distances as well as the hydroxyl
group angle. Across all metrics we find that both MPNNs achieve almost perfect agreement across the entire range
of 500 fs. Despite these very encouraging results, however, we note that larger errors and instabilities could occur at
longer timescales.
B.3 Forecasting Efficiency
Here, we evaluate the computational efficiency of our approach by measuring the number of steps and estimated
trajectory length achievable per day across different systems. Specifically, we perform forecasting in the NVT ensemble
for all three systems over 1,000 steps using the models from the experiments reported in the manuscript. To assess only
the efficiency of forward passes and velocity rescaling, no frames are saved. For the condensed matter systems of
quartz and liquid water, we additionally report these timings for 2 × 2 × 2 and 3 × 3 × 3 supercells. Throughout all
systems, we made sure that the trajectories were stable. Timings were measured on a NVIDIA V100-SXM2-32GB
GPU for the isolated atom and up to 2 × 2 × 2 supercells, while larger systems were benchmarked on an NVIDIA
A100-SXM4-40GB GPU due to memory requirements for the largest water system. An overview of the system and
timing details is provided in Table S2, where we report the fastest run across multiple trials on different devices of the
same type. Any observed deviations from the values reported were within approximately 20 seconds. Based on the
time for 1,000 steps and the prediction horizon, we extrapolate to estimate the approximate length of a trajectory that
TrajCast can generate for each system within one day.
Interestingly, the generation of the the trajectory for the molecule comprising 20 atoms only is on the same order of
magnitude as smallest quartz and water systems being almost one order of magnitude larger. Besides potential GPU
inefficiencies at this small system sizes, this may also stem from angular momentum conservation, which is incorporated
only into the MPNN trained for the gas-phase molecule. Future work could explore this by training a model on a
peptide or protein in vacuum. The deviations between quartz and water, conversely, originate from the different cut-offs
of 4.5 Å and 6.0 Å, respectively. Due to the large prediction horizon for quartz, TrajCast can generate nearly 20 ns of
trajectory for over 4,000 atoms, while for water, it achieves just over 1 ns per day for a system of about 5,000 atoms.
We note, however, that these values are merely rough guidelines and were obtained under testing environments avoiding
GPU-to-CPU transfers and disk writing.
Table S2: Computational efficiency of forecasting across chemical systems and sizes. These benchmarks were
obtained by generating 1,000 steps of a trajectory in the NVT ensemble. To purely estimate the inference time, no
intermittent atomic configurations were saved. Forecasts for the largest supercells of quartz and water were performed
on a NVIDIA A100-SXM4-40GB GPU, while all other systems were assessed on a NVIDIA V100-SXM2-32GB GPU.
System Supercell Natoms Prediction horizon ∆t [fs] Time per 1,000 steps [s] Length per day [ns]
Paracetamol 1 × 1 × 1 20 7.0 57.65 10.49
Quartz
1 × 1 × 1 162
30.0
53.75 48.22
2 × 2 × 2 1,296 75.16 34.49
3 × 3 × 3 4,374 145.68 17.79
Water
1 × 1 × 1 192
5.0
62.02 6.97
2 × 2 × 2 1,536 162.85 2.65
3 × 3 × 3 5,184 371.38 1.16
S6